الحمد بالله رب العالمين
الرحمن الرحيم
مالك يوم الدين
إياك نعبد وإياك نستعيم
اهدن الصراة المستقيم
صراة الذين أنعنت عليهم
غير المغضوب عليهم
السلام عليكم ورحمة الله وبركاته
بسم الله الرحمن الرحيم
الحمد لله رب العالمين
وبه نستعين ونصلي ونسلم
على أفضل الخلق أجمعين
نبينا محمد وعلى آله وصحبه واتابعين
ومن تبعهم بإحسان إلى يوم الدين وبعد
All praises due to Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
blessings and salutations upon
محمد صلى الله عليه وسلم
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala bless him
and his entire household
all his companions
may Allah bless them and bless every single one of us
and grant us goodness
beloved brothers and sisters in Islam
yesterday we were making mention of the story
where there was an accusation
leveled against the most pure of women
Aisha radiallahu anha
and just to recap as to exactly what had happened
as they were returning from the battle of Banu al-Mustaliq
the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
decided to instruct the army to leave
and Aisha radiallahu anha
was looking for a bracelet of hers or a necklace
and at that time
they used to have a haudaj
in the Arabic language the haudaj is
the cover at the top of the animal
or at the top of the camel
where the women folk used to sit
as the camel used to move
it used to protect them from the sun
as well as act as privacy for them
and when they stopped at a specific place
the camel would be made to sit down
the men would lift up the entire haudaj
and put it to the side
which would make it look like a little tent
and thereafter they would go away
and the women would then either come out
or remain in there and so on
be protected from the sun and what have you
so Aisha radiallahu anha says
as they had put it down
and I was doing some of my things
whatever I had to do
I realized that I was missing a necklace
and I went hunting for it
looking for it around
and the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
instructed the army to leave
they lifted up this haudaj
thinking that Aisha radiallahu anha was inside
they placed it on the camel
and they progressed
and she says when I got back
to the place where they were
I noticed there was no one
everyone had gone
and I told myself that perhaps
they will notice my absence
and they will return
but sadly they did not return
the army continued
and this was after the battle of Banu al-Mustalik
after some time
one of the sahaba radiallahu anhum
was passing from the path
and Aisha radiallahu anha says
I was dressed in black
I was quite tired
I was sitting down on the floor
meaning on the desert sand
and I had fallen off to sleep
and I got up by someone saying
inna lillahi wa inna ilayhi raji'oon
as I looked it was Safwan ibn al-Mu'attal
radiallahu anhu
he did not utter one word
he had understood already
that this is umul mu'mineen
Aisha radiallahu anha
and she has been left behind
by the entire caravan as they left
so he allowed his camel to be seated
and he got her onto it
and he took her all the way
to al-Madeen al-Munawwara
as they arrived
Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
who was the head of the hypocrites
who had during the battle of Banu al-Mustalik
made mention of something very strange
he said
la irraja'na ila al-Madeenati
layukhrijanna al-a'zoo minhal athal
when we get to Madina Munawwara
the superior will kick out the inferior
meaning we are going to fix Muhammad
a'udhu billah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
and we will see how we will remove him out
and we made mention yesterday
of Usaid ibn Hudayr
and the other companions who said
oh messenger sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
you are the superior and he is the inferior
so this man had had a plan in his head
whatever the plan was
this gave him reason to make something else up as well
and so when he saw Aisha radiallahu anha
enter Madina Munawwara
with Safwan ibn al-Mu'attal
he immediately started spreading a rumor
that these two have committed the sin
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us all
may He grant us goodness
may He protect us in our offspring
and may He really protect our tongues as well
so this rumor began
and Aisha radiallahu anha did not know about it at all
she didn't even hear
she went home
and it continued in the sense that
outside the house people started talking
and the people were divided into three categories
three major categories
one of them those who invented the lie
the head was Abdullah ibn Ubay ibn Salun
they created it
they knew it was just a rumor
which they had started with evil intent
the second group
those like Abu Ayub al-Ansari radiallahu anhu
he told his wife Ummu Ayub
he says oh Ummu Ayub
could you ever do something like that
she said never
well if you cannot
Aisha is cleaner than you
Allahu Akbar
so it's definitely a lie
and we are clean
we would believe she is even cleaner than us
so they immediately threw out the statement
and they refused to utter it
and they said
we believe that if we are pure
she is even purer
radiallahu anhu jami'an
that was one category of people
the other category of people were those
who had spread the lie
they did not create it
but they spread it
they spoke about it
did you hear the latest gossip and so on
now this is typical in our scenario nowadays
what happens to us
we find for some reason
we find sweetness in words and in statements
where rumor is being spread about others
may Allah safeguard us
so this is why we have a lesson to learn from this
and inshallah we will get to it in a few moments
so the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
heard about it
and he was very upset
he went into Aisha radiallahu anhu's room
several times
and he would just ask her
kayfateekum
which means
how is that one
he is talking to her
instead of saying how are you
he is saying how is that one
referring to her in absence
showing a distance between him and her
how is that one
imagine you talking to your wife
and you saying how is that one
how are you
Allahu Akbar
so this was him
he was upset
but this is how he showed it
sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and at the same time
he knew that it could either be a lie
or it could be true
although he knew within his heart
that this is a lie
but for him to come out and say
this is a lie
people would think
you are defending your wife
may Allah protect us
so he had to wait for revelation
for it to come with clarification
to clear the name of Ummul Mu'mineen
Aisha radiallahu anha
but revelation did not come
do you know why
one of the reasons was
that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
kept this whole incident as a test
in order to test everyone
and in order for it to be a lesson for us
who came later on
generations down the line
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us a lesson
so she was very very
innocent of it
she didn't even know
why is the messenger
salallahu alayhi wa sallam
being so distant
until one day she went out
with one of her relatives
known as Ummu Misthah
the mother of Misthah ibn Athatha
and when she went out
this woman tells her
ta'isa Misthah
Misthah has definitely lost
you know destruction upon Misthah
so Aisha radiallahu anha
looks at her and says
how can you say that about someone
who took part in the battle of Badr
Misthah ibn Athatha
Misthah ibn Athatha radiallahu anha
he was a poor man
who was related to Abu Bakr al-Siddiq radiallahu anha
and Aisha was the daughter of Abu Bakr al-Siddiq radiallahu anha
and Abu Bakr used to spend money on him
and Abu Bakr al-Siddiq radiallahu anha
who used to give him charities and look after him
so Aisha is saying
oh Ummu Misthah
how can you say this about your own son
when he has taken part in the battle of Badr
and we made mention of the rank of the people
who took part in the battle of Badr
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala grant us also a rank
through his mercy
so she said didn't you hear
what he is saying
now Misthah was not from amongst those
who invented the lie
but he was one of those who was active in spreading it
did you hear what happened
and then he would tell someone
and then tell someone
did you hear what happened
so now when his mother told Aisha radiallahu anha
she was shocked
she went back home in tears
the Prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam walked in
same question
kaifatikum
how is that one
she says oh messenger
salallahu alaihi wasallam
do you permit me to go to my parents home
look at this word
do you allow me to go home
now she's understood what's happening
do you allow me to go and see my mother and father
so the Prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam permitted her to go
she went in order to find out what to be done
oh my mother
have you heard what people are saying
she said
ummu ruman radiallahu anha
the mother of Aisha radiallahu anha
do you know
when the Prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam later on
spoke about ummu ruman
the mother of Aisha
he said whoever wants to see a hur from jannah
look at ummu ruman
subhanallah
this was the mother of Aisha radiallahu anha
so she speaks to her daughter
saying oh my daughter
don't worry don't get too
overexcited about this rumour here
meaning don't overreact
leave it
sometimes what happens
someone who is good looking like you
quite young like you
subhanallah
you may have people who spread things and so on
don't read too deep into it ya Aisha
so the mother is giving advice
to her daughter
subhanallah
and Aisha radiallahu anha says no
it's very difficult for me
because here there is rumour spread
the messenger salallahu alaihi wasallam is not speaking to me
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala has not sent revelation
and I am completely innocent
the mother did not doubt the innocence of her daughter
subhanallah
and the father abu bakar as-siddiq radiallahu anhu
what should he say
he is a friend of rasoolullah salallahu alaihi wasallam
as well as
a father-in-law at the same time
and he is a person who is a follower at the same time
what should he say
Allah and his messenger know best
so this caused a lot of discomfort
until the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam
many days later
after continuing in this manner with Aisha radiallahu anha
crying, rumours spreading
people falling into several categories
and so on
and Aisha radiallahu anha
says I couldn't even sleep properly
and I couldn't even eat
and I couldn't
I really didn't even understand
what was happening due to lots of crying
and so on
but all I knew is Allah would clear my name
Allah would send revelation
I was innocent, completely innocent
so now
the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam decided
to ask some of his companions
because revelation did not come for more than a month
so he calls Ali ibn Abi Talib
and Usama ibn Zaid radiallahu anhum
he says oh Ali, what do you think
oh Usama, what do you think
Usama ibn Zaid radiallahu anhu
he says
this is a fabrication
that's what he says
he says
Aisha radiallahu anha
she is clean, she is pure
this is all the mischief of hypocrites
and so on
and Ali radiallahu anhu
he says look
she is a young lady
there are many other women besides her
why don't you ask
the servant Barirah
and see what she says
so the prophet salallahu alaihi wasallam asks
Barirah
Barirah was the servant of Aisha radiallahu anha
oh Barirah
what do you think of this
Barirah says wallahi it is false
she is one of the most chaste women
that you could have
very clean, very pure
and she went on praising her in her own words
and Rasulullah salallahu alaihi wasallam then got up
he was upset
he went out where the Ansar were
and he says
who is going to excuse me
regarding a person
whose harm has now reached
the innermost part of my own home
which means Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
which means who can retaliate
or who would excuse me
if I were to retaliate
Sa'd ibn Mu'adh radiallahu anhu gets up
and says oh messenger
who is he
if he is from my clan
I will execute him
and if he is from the other clan
you tell us what to do
we will do it
so immediately Sa'd ibn Ubada
who was from the other clan
one was Sa'd ibn Mu'adh
who made the statement
Sa'd ibn Ubada radiallahu anhu said no
you won't kill him
if he is from our clan
how can you say
that you will sort him out and so on
and it pursued
Usaid ibn Hudayr radiallahu anhu got up
and he also added something
he said no
if this person has harmed the messenger
then they deserve to be dealt with
how dare someone say something of this nature
and the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
was standing and watching the Ansar
talking amongst themselves
with the Muhajireen and so on
and there was this discussion
and in Madina Munawwara
people were all just
into all these categories
one group talking
one group excited in the background
really watching in glee
as everything is happening
according to their plan
those were the hypocrites
and one group saying
this is a total fabrication
so then the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
goes into the room of Aisha radiallahu anhu
and he greets
now when he greets
she thought some goodness is coming
but instead of that
he says
tashahud
ashadu alla ilaha illallah
wa ashadu anna muhammadan abduhu wa rasuluhu
then he says amma ba'du
thereafter
so now he is making a statement
it's a statement regarding what happened
he's saying
oh Aisha
if you are innocent
Allah will reveal your innocence
and if you have committed a sin
remember
you admit your error to Allah
Allah will forgive you
and Allah will cleanse you
and so on
so he gave her the options
and she began to weep
because this meant
that there is still no clarification
she began to weep
until there came a time when she said
if I am to say
I am innocent
they won't believe me
and if I am to say
that I am guilty
that's what they want to hear
but that would be a lie
because I am innocent
so I am in a fix basically
caught between the two
Aisha radiallahu anhu is saying
and she says
I told them
that I cannot utter any words
besides the words of the Prophet Yaqoob
Jacob may peace be upon him
when he had lost his son Yusuf alayhi salam
he said
my patience shall be beautiful
by the help of Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala
indeed Allah is the one
Allah is the one who will assist
regarding their statements
and what they are describing
this was the statement
she repeated this
and then she says
as they walked out of the house
before they could leave the house
revelation came to Muhammad salallahu alayhi wasalam
this was almost a month
over a month later
Arabic
Allahu Akbar
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says
indeed those who have come
with the fabrication
are a group from amongst you
imagine when revelation came out
the word fabrication was used
as soon as that word was used
it was a clarification for everything
because that's what they were waiting for
the minute the term if was used
it means a fabrication
someone who has accused another person
falsely of immorality
so when Allah revealed the verses
that those who have brought about
this false accusation
are a group from amongst you
they knew it was already a lie
Subhanallah
then Allah says
do not think that it is bad for you
it is in fact good for you
let's stop there for a moment
today when people spread rumor about us
do you know that sometimes
your success is directly connected
to the rumor that people spread about you
as a direct result of it
Allah gives you success
in different aspects of your life
because when they spread rumor
they are taking away your sin
when they've taken away your sins
sometimes things you haven't even done
because the rumor continues and spreads
amongst a thousand people
when you are only one man or one woman
so a thousand people have taken away
more than the sins you actually have
by then giving you the good deeds they have
what happens to you
you become pure
you become cleansed
you become a person who's elevated
your doors open one after the other
you don't know
how come I am leading such a happy life
but it is all connected to the rumor
that is spread against you
Allah says don't ever think it's bad for you
it's actually very good for you
Subhanallah
and then Allah says
everyone who took part in that particular
accusation shall bear their sin of it
and the one who created the fabrication
shall have a massive punishment
who was Abdullah ibn Ubayy ibn Salul
so Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala revealed these verses
and Aisha radiallahu anha
when she was told by Ummul Oman
her mother
get up
why don't you embrace him
because now the problem is sorted
she says why should I get up and embrace him
I have none to thank besides Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
she was obviously upset at the time
because she was being accused
and now she was so happy
because the cleansing came from the heavens
subhanallah
and this is why she always used to say
to her compatriots
that you know I am the one
whose name was cleansed from the heavens
subhanallah
and these were the verses
Surah An-Nur
if we pick up the Quran
and read Surah An-Nur
we will see these verses there
beautiful powerful verses
and this is why Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
describes this
it is a very very interesting story
but the lessons to be learned from there
are even greater
because Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says
...
shouldn't the believers
when they heard such a rumour
think to themselves
shouldn't they have thought to themselves
that if we cannot do this
she definitely cannot do it
and this is what Abu Ayyub Al-Ansari
had done
and they should have said
this is a fabrication and it's a lie
...
shouldn't you have uttered immediately
as you heard it
that look we should not be
messing our tongues
with this type of statement
don't talk about this
indeed it's a big fabrication
against the pure people
...
so this is Allah teaching us
when you hear rumour
when you hear various comments
the best thing is to say
I don't want to mess my tongue
with this statement
and I don't want to utter that
which is lies
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
then Allah says
...
let them bring forth
four eye witnesses regarding the act
if they don't bring those
if they don't bring those four eye witnesses
...
then they are the liars
in the eyes of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
in fact at that point
a punishment was sent by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
for those who were spreading the accusation
Allah says they had to be whipped
eighty lashes
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
anyone who accuses
a believing male or female
of immorality and adultery
they should be told to bring
four eye witnesses
who have witnessed the act
if they cannot do that
they should be lashed eighty lashes
and this is the injunction of the Quran
today we see people walking out there
and we very very interestingly say
you know what
these people are having an affair
or these people are going out
wallahi
you know what Allah says
...
you have received it with your tongues
you have uttered it with your tongues
you are saying the statement with your mouths
and you are considering it light
yet in the eyes of Allah
it is a huge sin to accuse people
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
really
look at the words
then Allah says
...
those people who love to spread
the tales of immorality
amongst the believers
for them there will be a severe punishment
in this world
and then in the next as well
what does this mean
people who like to spread stories
true or false
if it is a story of immorality
why spread it
you are encouraging others
the first thing you are doing is
you are backbiting
if it is not backbiting
it is slander
and on top of that
you will be telling others
and people will start thinking
well this is a sin that is common
so if we are committing it
then it doesn't make us any different
and so on
so it encourages people to actually sin
Allah says that is why
stories of immorality
you should never ever spread them
those who like to spread
stories of immorality
amongst the believing
male and female
they will be punished
Allah says in this world
and then the next
may Allah safeguard us
and from this the ulamas say
that to read books
that are what we would term
x-rated full of stories of immorality
is forbidden
because it falls under this verse
and the same applies
pornography and so on
and anything immoral
even if there is a movie
that has something immoral in it
we should remember
we should be further away from it
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
the reason why I say further away
is we as muslimin
shouldn't even be indulged
in that in the first place
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
and grant us a lesson
there are so many verses here
that have a lesson for all of us
now Aisha radi allahu anha
her name was cleansed
by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
her status was elevated
now abu bakr as-siddiq radi allahu anhu
was faced with a difficulty
what was the difficulty?
that young man
mistah ibn athatha
who was spreading the rumour
he was one of the relatives
and abu bakr as-siddiq radi allahu anhu
as we said
used to spend on him
and give him charities
and look after him basically
so when he spread the rumour
abu bakr as-siddiq radi allahu anhu
was so upset that he said
wallahi i am not going to spend
on this man again
so Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
revealed verses after this
to abu bakr as-siddiq
or referring to abu bakr as-siddiq
radi allahu anhu
these verses revealed
to rasulullah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
wa la ya'tali ulul fadli minkum wassati
an yu'tu ulil qurba
wal masakeen wal muhajireen
fi sabeelillah
wal ya'foo wal ya'sfahoo
ala tuhibbon an yaghfir allahu lakum
wallahu ghafoorun raheem
those who have been granted virtue by Allah
and ease and wealth by Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
they should never take an oath
or make an oath
that they are not going to spend upon the poor
and upon people who have engaged in the hijra
and upon those who are relatives
they should not do that
they should forgive and they should embrace
for indeed do they not want to be forgiven by Allah
the question is
do you not want to be forgiven by Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala
while Allah is most forgiving most merciful
when Abu Bakr as-Siddiq radiallahu anhu heard this verse
he immediately said yes indeed
I want to be forgiven by Allah
so I forgive this man
what about the oath
you had taken an oath
well he had to pay the recompense of that oath
in order to then break it
so that he could fulfill the command of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
and never again did he stop
in his charitable deeds towards this particular man
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
today we would never help someone
who has actively spread rumour about us
and harmed us in our lives or our family members
I don't think from amongst us
there would be many if any
who would actually do that
and on top of that even if we were to help
sometimes shaitan comes to us
and makes us think right
because I am financing this man
I can now control him
doesn't suddenly enslave the person
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
and may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala make us
from amongst those whom
when we spend we spend for his cause
and may he make us from those who learn a lesson
from Abu Bakr al-Siddiq radiallahu anhu
do you know why he forgave
one of the reasons obviously was the instruction of Allah
but he says I want to be forgiven by Allah
so let me forgive this man
if we forgive people Allah will forgive us
irhamu man fil ardi
yarhamkum man fil sama
have mercy upon those on earth
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala will have mercy upon you
so if we have a quality of forgiving people
you will find that Allah's quality of forgiveness
is far greater than anything
we can come up with
and this is why
find it in your heart to forgive
for indeed when Allah sees that
on the day that we need forgiveness
we will find Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
forgiving us
now this is a very very powerful verse
and these entire verses that we have read today
very powerful the lessons are all in surah al-nur
if we turn the pages of surah al-nur
we will come to learn
whatever we have said this evening
and alhamdulillah we ask Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
to grant us purity
and to grant us chastity to protect us
and our offspring
our family members and the ummah at large
from immoral behaviour
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala purify us all
now we have
another battle that took place
at the time of Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wa sallam
it is reported in the fifth year of Hijra
and when in the fifth year
the majority say in the month of Shawwal
which was just after Ramadan
you see yesterday we made mention of
Banu al-Nadheer
the tribe and the group of people
who were told to leave
Al Madinatul Munawwara
and these people a lot of them went to
a place near Sham known as Adra'at
but there were some of them
a group of them who had gone to Khaybar
from amongst them was Huyay ibn al-Akhtab
and a few others
these were the senior people
from those who were expelled from Banu al-Nadheer
that was a Jewish clan
in the outskirts of Madinatul Munawwara
they had gone to Khaybar
from Khaybar they decided
we are wealthy
we have a lot of date palms
lot of dates and so on
lot of produce
why don't we form a little committee
and we let this committee go
and visit all the tribes and clans
mainly the two major groups
one was Ghatafan and one was Quraysh
we will go to Ghatafan and speak to them
and we will go to Quraysh and speak to them
and we will bring them together
and we will be allied together
and as a confederate
we will then march on to Madinatul Munawwara
and wipe out the Muslims for once and for all
because they chased us out of Al Madinatul Munawwara
now to refresh your memories
the reason why they were expelled
was they broke the treaty
they wanted to murder Muhammad SAW
and they were caught red handed
and on top of that
they had broken the treaty in several other ways
so Muhammad SAW asked them to leave
and that was actually some point of mercy
because they were guilty of war crimes
they could have been executed rightfully
but they were not
they were asked to leave
so these people they sent a team to Ghatafan
they told Ghatafan
look we want you to give us as many men as you can
we're going to come together and make an alliance
and we will pay you for it
because Ghatafan they had no problem
they had no problem at all
they did not want to fight
Quraysh was the one who wanted to fight
so these people said okay we will pay you
Ghatafan says how much are you going to pay us
so the people of Khyber
these people of Banu Nadir
they said we will pay you one year
produce of dates from the whole of Khyber
now that's a lot
it's like saying the economy of our whole country
for one year will go to you
may Allah protect us
so these people agreed
no problem we join your alliance
in the meantime the same group went to Quraysh
and they spoke to Abu Sufyan
look we have the alliance
it's already made up of little tribes and groups
and Ghatafan has joined us with thousands of men
you also bring men and so on
and Quraysh they had a gripe against the Muslims
they wanted to settle scores
so they said this is a brilliant idea
and in no time they agreed
they decided we are going to join
and thereafter they said
let's march on to Madinah Monawara
they gathered 10,000 men
now in the meantime the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
knew everything that was going on
he was aware of what the people of Banu Nadir were doing
he was aware of the agreement with Ghatafan
he was aware of the agreement with Quraysh
and he was also aware
that now they want to march on to Madinah Monawara
so the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
got together his companions
and he says oh my companions
what should we do
10,000 strong men
heavily armed from different tribes and groups
and alliance Al Ahzab
they are coming towards Madinah Monawara
what should we do
so the different companions began to make suggestions
until Salman Al Farsi
the man from Persia
the man whom we spoke about
how he accepted Islam
and his father
was one of the fire worshippers in Persia
and he had then left
and gone to Assham
where he became a Christian
and from there he was enslaved
on his way to Arabia
in pursuit of the messenger
and when he came to Madinah Monawara
how he accepted Islam
and how the Prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
assisted him to pay
those who had enslaved him
in order for him to buy his freedom
by planting those date palms
and we said from 300 of them
none of those date palms had actually died
this is the same man
he says oh messenger
in my area
which means in Persia
when there is a big army that is coming
and we want to block the horses from entering
we create, we dig a trench
around the city
we dig a trench around the city
now for us to think of a trench
around the whole of Madinah
that is something very difficult
but for your information
there was no need to dig the trench
around the whole of Madinah
because there were only certain places
from which the army could have entered Madinah
on some parts it was very rocky
some parts it was mountainous
they couldn't enter from those parts
only the flat land
where they could have come from
that is where the trench was then agreed to be dug
but the Prophet ﷺ asked his companions
what do you all think of this?
some new strategy of war
nobody had known about it before
the people here
no one was aware that this was going to happen
so the Prophet ﷺ
after having consulted his companions
agreed and they went out on horseback
to look where should this thing be dug
they demarcated it correctly
and every 40 feet
was given to 10 companions to dig
and the Prophet ﷺ
himself joined in
also in one of the groups
ﷺ
not like the leaders of today
they sit back and the army is busy working
here the messenger ﷺ
so much so that was a time of hunger
it was a time when they had a few days
to achieve this whole
huge achievement
to dig this big trench
they just had a few days
it is reported that in total
this trench was 10 kilometers long
in the different parts of it
22 feet wide
16 feet deep
took 6 days to dig
and each 10 companions
were handed 40 feet to dig
Subhanallah
imagine this is quite deep
it's not a joke and it's quite wide as well
because a horse
as the horses are coming
they don't go so deep
they would refuse to get in
and what would happen is
an opportunity to be with all their
arrows and spears
and weaponry on the
sides such that if anyone
attempted to come they would be
pelted or they would be immediately
attacked with arrows
and so on
so this was something in no
time Subhanallah
this was done we said it took them
6 days these 6 days
were 6 days of great difficulty
where they were working
flat out Subhanallah
because they had to do it urgently
and in these 6 days it's important for me
to make mention of some of the miracles
of Rasulullah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
he was digging himself
and when they had
a huge rock to break
and they couldn't break it they called him
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
according to some narrations he was given
the power of 30 men Subhanallah
he was given the power of 30
men Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
and he would then
destroy the rock
and flatten it out or
make it rubble Sallallahu
Alaihi Wasallam yet the companions were
unable to do that so Jabir Ibn
Abdullah Radhiallahu Anhu says when he lifted
a rock in order to hit it on another one
I saw that he had tied a
rock on his belly because of hunger
Subhanallah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
so a person is hungry
try it out it actually works
I was speaking to someone from Europe
complaining about how long the fast is
I said have you ever tried the Sunnah
you know tie a rock they started laughing
I said you know what if you can't tie
a hot water bottle or a cold water bottle
it might work may Allah Subhanahu
Alaihi Wasallam protect us what it does
it actually flattens the belly and
pushes it in so that you don't feel
hungry although you are very hungry
Subhanallah
so Rasulullah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
when Jabir Ibn Abdullah saw this
he felt that this is the messenger
he is working so hard
he saw all this dust
on the messenger Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam's body
and he saw a rock tied on his belly
and he then went home
he tells his wife home was very close
not very far from the trench he says
what do we have she says well we have a goat
and we have a little bit of barley
so or wheat and
he says okay let me slaughter
this thing and prepare a good meal put this thing
in the oven and I'm calling Nabi Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
with one or two men so the Prophet
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam then was told by
Jabir Ibn Abdullah that
Ya Rasulallah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
if you can come to
my home I've prepared a small
meal you and perhaps you can bring one or
two people
so the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam asked him
what he said he repeated it
when he said that the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
made an announcement loud
announcement he says we have
been invited to the house of Jabir
Ibn Abdullah let's all go for a meal
now he was shocked how are we going to go
Rasulullah Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam
I only had told him
to bring along one or two people because
how are we going to feed the whole army here
and a lot of the companions
had come and Jabir Ibn Abdullah
tells his wife that you know what
they are coming and there's a lot of them
now think what would happen in our case
I think we would be dead meat
may Allah Subhanahu Wa Ta'ala protect us
in some cases and in some
cases they would be very happy Masha Allah
you say no problem I know of some
cases where they say you can bring as many as you want
but Mochachos is round the corner you better
bring some food there as well Masha Allah
Allah Subhanahu Wa Ta'ala grant us ease
and Baraka Wallahi we have so much
convenience Allah has made life so easy
for us still sometimes we
are not hospitable Masha Allah
I know this community full of hospitality
sometimes you find Shaytan
overtakes us and we feel lazy
when the Baraka is in feeding the guest
sometimes the Baraka is
feeding the guest the Sahaba
used to get worried when no guest
used to come to their homes they used to think
what's going on is there something wrong with my wealth
is there something wrong with my sustenance
no Baraka in the home so what
happened here when Rasulullah
Sallallahu Alayhi Wasallam was coming
with all his companions Jabir
tells his wife and now there are
a few narrations I'm mentioning one of them
in one narration the wife says
does the Prophet Sallallahu Alayhi Wasallam
know that we had only told
him one or two people and
he says yes well in that
case no problem in that case
it's fine Subhanallah when the
Prophet Sallallahu Alayhi Wasallam was coming he sent
an instruction go and tell your family
that they should not take the
pot off the fire and they should
not remove whatever is in the oven
from it Subhanallah
they were about to witness
a miracle the Prophet Sallallahu
Alayhi Wasallam came he removed
from the pot and he kept on removing
from the oven until the whole army
was fed Subhanallah
this was the miracle similar
miracle had happened to the Prophet
Isa Alayhi Wasallam a four time
Jesus may peace be upon him
we have made mention
of this in the past and it is
made mention of even in the Ahadeel
and the records of the Muslimin
that this is from amongst the miracles
of the Prophet Jesus may peace be upon
him Isa Alayhi Wasallam
here it has repeated itself
with Muhammad Sallallahu Alayhi Wasallam
and we ask
Allah Subhanahu Wa Ta'ala to grant us goodness
they were shocked they were not only
shocked but it resulted
in them being reinforced their
Iman being strengthened they
went back to dig and Subhanallah
in no time this army had
arrived when the army
came they were also surprised
they had heard that the Muslims
are doing something strange
because there was
one more tribe of these people
of the book on the outskirts of
Medina known as Banu Quraidha
we heard that Banu Qinuqa' was expelled
Banu An-Nadir were expelled
and as for Banu Quraidha
they were there but they felt this time
there is no ways the Muslims are going to
win they're going to be wiped out so they
align themselves
with the Confederates
they even sent or they were trying
to send some camels with some dates
and some food and assistance
which was intercepted by the Muslims
and it was taken away and the Prophet
Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam then made it clear
that these people have broken the treaty as well
Banu Quraidha and Banu
Quraidha they had a plan they had
hatched a plan Insha'Allah we will see it in a few moments
so the armies
came they were shocked they looked at this
trench they couldn't move as they tried
they were being attacked by spears
Muslims so they couldn't move they were
camping outside if they went around
the Prophet Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam had spread
his army out all the Muslims were there
because they were in Medina so there was
no question of how many men were the Muslims
they were all there and
so there were some on the mountains
taking care of that some on the rocky land
taking care of that some on the different
parts of Medina taking care of that
and the strategic trench
which was dug Subhanallah
was heavily protected by the
Muslims which means nobody can
come in
tried to come in he was immediately attacked
in fact there was another man
who tried to come in as well
and he was also attacked but before we
get to that in the meantime in
Medina Munawwara
something happened Banu Quraidha
decided you know what
we need to see how best
we can attack the Muslims from behind
so let us first go
and try and cause
disturbance amongst their women and children
who are left in the city
so as they sent a spy
Safiyah binti Abdul Muttalib
who was the aunt of Rasulullah
sallallahu alayhi wa sallam and the sister of Hamza bin
Abdul Muttalib she saw
the spy come in to spy on the women
and children in Medina so she took a
log and she knocked him
executing the man he was
executed
gone why espionage
the man was a spy the man was
guilty of a crime a huge crime
and at the same time he was coming to go back
to Banu Quraidha to tell them that you can
come and perhaps attack the women
or anything could have happened so
when they saw that this man has been attacked
by a log from behind a home
they thought that now there are many men
who are also hidden within Medina Munawwara
so they did not bother going to attack
there subhanallah look at the wisdom
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala had inspired
this sahabiyya to actually
knock this man
in a way that the whole
army had stayed behind
and they were protected
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us as well
as we said Ikrimah Ibn Abi Jahal
tried to come through the
trench
they attacked him he had
to go back then there was a man known as
Amr Ibn Abdi Widd
this man Amr Ibn Abdi
Widd he tried to come
into the trench
in order to get to the Muslim side
and Ali radiallahu anhu attacked him
and he died
on the Muslim side
which means he had come almost
to where the Muslims were
when he died Quraish
offered money to say
we will pay you whatever
you want to retrieve
this body we want the body of
the dead man the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
got up and said this is a
body it is a dirty body it is
a filthy body the body of a mushrik
we will never accept any money for it
throw it meaning give it back to them
give it back to them as is we don't
want money for it because it would be
selling a dead body and that would be
haram in the sharia you are selling
a dead body why do you want to do that
may Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala protect us
and grant us goodness that body was returned
thereafter and now
as these people were
camping and they were trying and
looking and thinking several things
happened
first the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam
decided that we need
to send someone
into that camp to see exactly
what is going on and what is
happening so the prophet sallallahu
alaihi wasallam chose
a man from ghatafan
who had accepted Islam
and this man who had accepted Islam
from ghatafan
his name was
Noaim ibn Masood al ghatafani
no one from
ghatafan knew that this man had accepted
Islam
so he says oh messenger i can go
and i can do anything because
they don't even know so the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam instructed him to go
and told him what to do
this man was extremely intelligent
very intelligent
he went out
and he arrived on
the other side and he
spoke to ghatafani
and he spoke to the
Jewish tribe of Banu al-Nadir
and those who had come from Khyber and he
spoke to the people of Quraish telling
each one a different story
so he told these
people of Quraish
that you see these Jewish people are
asking you for a guarantee
because now they're getting tired
they're getting fed up they're not trusting you anymore
then he tells the people of ghatafan
you people are my
people we are going to be
fought for no reason what are we going to go back
with and then he tells
the people of
Khyber or those
Huyay ibn Akhtab and the others
he tells them you see Quraish is mistrusting
you they are planning to leave
they want to go away so each
one began to doubt the other so what happened
the alliance there was now
visible cracks that were
there and
this type of
dissent began amongst the alliance
in the meantime the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
called some of the leaders
of ghatafan onto this side
in order to silently strike
a deal with them he sent a messenger
and he brought two of their
leaders and he
told the two leaders one was Huyayna ibn
Hisan and the other one was Al-Harith ibn
Awf he says do you know what you people
want to fight us for what reason
the only thing you want is wealth these
people have promised you that they will give you
the dates of Khyber for one year
well what if we promise you
one third of the dates of Medina
or one third of the produce of Medina
would you then go away
they said yes we will go away because the only
thing we want is money if we getting it without
a fight why should we fight
but we want more than one third the prophet
says no sallallahu alaihi wasallam you get
one third if we agree
we sign an agreement that
we will give you one third of the
produce of Medina for the year on
condition that you leave this confederation
and you return and you do not fight
Muslims and so on and so forth so
the people of ghatafan agreed and they said okay
we're going to go in the meantime the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam had a habit he always
consulted his companions so
he looked at Sa'ad ibn Mu'adh
the head of
Al-Aws he says oh Sa'ad
what's your opinion Sa'ad
says why should we pay them our produce
for what let them go back Allah
will give us victory
why should we
promise these people one third of
our produce we as it is we are
going to win this war is going to be won by
us and it's impossible
for us not to win this by the will
of Allah and the help of Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
now we should strike an agreement so
these two people were shocked because he
wasn't the only one who said that the other
companions agreed with him they said
we do not want
we do not want to strike an
agreement with ghatafan send them back
they asked oh messenger sallallahu alaihi wasallam
is this revelation or
can we say
something and the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
says no you can say whatever you want
because we are still trying to agree with
these people they refused flat
so the people of ghatafan had to go back
when they went back there was even a bigger
disaster because now
there were cracks amongst the people of ghatafan
they were getting tired and then
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
sent his help after
Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam made a
lot of dua and after
so many days
Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala says in the Quran
oh you who believe
remember the favor of Allah upon you
the day that the
alliance and the confederates
had come to you and we
sent to them a very strong
cold wind
and armies that you did not
see the angels had also come
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
makes mention of this favor upon the
believers so the weather conditions
began to change miraculously
why do we say
miraculously there was only a
trench between the muslimeen
and the kuffar and on that side
it was cold wind
and then it started to rain
and there was quite a lot of
chaos and on this side there
was absolutely nothing subhanallah
this was another miracle mu'jiza
of nabi sallallahu alaihi wasallam one of
the miracles of nubuwa Allah had granted
to Rasulullah sallallahu alaihi wasallam
and the muslims were camped in different places
if we visit today one of
the places by Jabal sil'a in
the mountain of sil'a
where part of the trench was dug
there is a massive masjid there
and they will show you this is the place where
abu bakr as-sadiq radiallahu anhu had camped
this is the place where the prophet
sallallahu alaihi wasallam had camped
and this is the place where for example
uthman abni affan radiallahu anhu had camped
and so on it is still there
and we can go and actually see where
this thing happened
so the prophet sallallahu alaihi wasallam
had made a lot of dua
part of his dua it's important to say
the words he said he says
oh Allah who revealed this
book and oh Allah
who has full control
of the clouds
oh Allah
subhanahu wa ta'ala
who will destroy
these confederates
split them up and destroy them
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
after some time sent this rain
and this rain came in
and not only the rain but severe wind
what did the wind do?
cold wind the fires were extinguished
the tents were
flying
the horses became hysterical
and the people were
becoming very ill and sick
and they decided no we need to leave
so a group started leaving
another group started leaving and these people
started leaving subhanallah
and Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala makes mention of this
gift that Allah subhanahu wa ta'ala
had given Rasoolullah
sallallahu alayhi wa sallam it's important
we make mention of one
other person who took
or who played a very important role
in this battle his name was Hudayfah
ibn al-Yaman radiallahu anhu
the prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
says who can go and spy for us on the
other side be careful
and a little while
later when he saw that no one is responding
he says oh Hudayfah get up
and go for us on the other side be careful
bring us news of the people
so Hudayfah ibn al-Yaman in the evening
when it was very dark and the wind was
blowing and so on it had already started blowing
he went onto the other side
and as he was sitting he was listening to
everything and he says wallahi
i was so close to Abu Sufyan
had if i wanted
i could have taken my spear and executed
him there Abu Sufyan was the leader of the
enemy and he says but i did not
do that because the prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
says be careful and don't let
them find out about you
meaning don't give yourself up
and he says then in the evening
Abu Sufyan sensed something
so he says oh my people
i fear there is a spy
amongst us so each one of you
grab hold of the person next to you
and ask him his name
Allahu Akbar
so as soon as Hudayfah ibn al-Yaman
heard this he
immediately picked the
person next to him and said what's your name
he says i am Muawiyah and he picked the one next to him
he says what's your name he says i am Amr ibn al-As
and he was quiet no one asked him who are you
because he had asked both of them
Subhanallah
and when he came back he told Rasulullah
sallallahu alayhi wa sallam what had happened and this was
also a miracle where
he was very intelligent he immediately asked
what's your name and what's your name and so
nobody asked him what was his name may Allah
sallallahu alayhi wa sallam open our doors these people
thereafter were dispersed
by Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
and verses were revealed in the whole
Surah known as Surah al-Ahzab
where Allah makes mention of the Hippocrates
and how they had wanted
to go back and Allah sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
makes mention of how
there were people who really felt
that on this day the Muslims would not be victorious
but Allah says with our
power we chased them away
we sent them they went back to Makkah
al-Mukarramah and they had lost
and inshallah tomorrow we will go through some of these
verses that expose the Hippocrates
and at the same time we will see what happened
to Banu Qurayza those people
who had sided with the enemy
thinking that on that day the Muslims
would never win and they broke their treaty
what did the Prophet sallallahu alayhi wa sallam
do to them inshallah we will see that tomorrow
until then